电影《源代码》（Source Code）
#############################
:date: 2011-06-30 23:52
:modified: 2011-08-03 20:12
:author: Calf
:category: 影视音乐
:tags: Movie, Science Fiction
:keywords: Quantum, Source Code, 平行宇宙, 时间旅行
:slug: movie-source-code
:lang: zh_cn
:featured_image: https://blog.gocalf.com/images/2011/07/source_code.jpg
:summary: 一篇物理学家写的关于电影《源代码》的文章，觉得非常不错，转载于此。

昨天无意间看到一个视频，名字叫“源代码”。第一反应是网友恶搞的关于 IT 民工的短片，可是看到时间轴上显示总长为九十多分钟，才反应过来这是个电影。可依旧以为是 IT 民工相关的东西。看了几分钟之后发现是一部关于平行宇宙的科幻电影。

现在关于时间旅行的故事主要有两种吧。一种我称之为“宿命论”，它严格遵守了时空旅行不能改变历史的规律，主角们在回到过去的时候不论做了什么，都无法改变已经发生的事实，因为事实就是在过去的那个时候，有人从未来回来做了一些事情。如果一个人试图回到过去杀害他的祖父，那一定不会成功，或者如果成功了则会发现，啊，原来死了的人其实不是他的亲生祖父……

另一种就是像 Source
Code 这样的，平行宇宙论。一个人回到过去，其实是回到了一个平行宇宙中（应该是在他回到过去的那一瞬间分裂出来的一个新的宇宙吧），他在这个世界中做任何事，都不会影响到他来自的那个世界已经发生过的事情。

看到了一篇物理学家写的关于这个电影的文章，觉得非常不错，他对电影中一些现象的理解跟我的理解也很接近。转载于此留个印记。

附：在线观看电影《源代码》地址 http://video.sina.com.cn/v/b/55050458-1650913383.html

注：以下内容有剧透。

.. more

======== 分隔符 ========

以下内容转载自 http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/cosmicvariance/2011/04/12/guest-post-jim-kakalios-on-the-quantum-mechanics-of-source-code/。

Jim Kakalios on the Quantum Mechanics of Source Code
----------------------------------------------------

by `Sean`_

Jim Kakalios of the University of Minnesota has achieved internet
demi-fame — he has `a YouTube video`_ with over a million and a half
views. It's on the science of *Watchmen*, the movie based on Alan
Moore's graphic novel. Jim got that sweet gig because he wrote a great
book called |The Science of Superheroes|_ — what better credentials
could you ask for?

More recently Jim has written another book,
|The Amazing Story of Quantum Mechanics|_.
But even without superheroes in the title,
everything Jim thinks about ends up being relevant to movies before too
long. The new movie |Source Code|_ features a twist at the end that
involves — you guessed it — quantum mechanics. Jim has applied his
physicist super-powers to unraveling what it all means, and was kind
enough to share his thoughts with us in this guest post.

——————————————————————-

There is `an interesting discussion taking place on the internets`_
concerning the ending of the newly released film SOURCE CODE, that
suggests that the film concludes with a paradox. I believe that any such
paradox can be resolved – with Physics!

This entire post is one big honkin' SPOILER, so if you want to read
about the final twist ending of a film without having seen said film –
by all means, read on, MacDuff!

In SOURCE CODE, Jake Gyllenhaal plays US helicopter pilot Colter
Stevens, whose consciousness is inserted into another man's body (Sean
Fentress, a school teacher in Chicago) through a procedure that requires
a miracle exception from the laws of nature (involving quantum mechanics
and "parabolic calculus" – by the way, there is no such thing as
parabolic calculus). Thanks to some technobabble (or as Q-Bert on
Futurama would describe it – weapons grade bolognium) Colter's mind can
only enter Sean's body in the last eight minutes of Sean's life. As Sean
is sitting on a city bound Chicago commuter train, on which a bomb will
explode at 7:58 AM, killing everyone aboard, the goal is for Colter to
ascertain who planted the bomb. He cannot stop it from exploding, he is
told, because that has already happened. He cannot affect the past, but
he can bring information obtained in the past back to his present time.
Learning the identity of the bomber would enable the authorities to
prevent the detonation of a threatened second "dirty atomic" bomb is
downtown Chicago.

While the above can be discerned from the movie trailer, what I am going
to discuss next involves the actual ending of the film, and if you do
not want this ending spoiled, you should stop reading now.

Colter learns that the reason his last memory is being attacked in his
helicopter in Afghanistan is that he in fact died in the crash. His
mangled body is kept artificially alive, and his brain can be activated,
and sent to inhabit the body of Sean Fentress (who happens to be a
neurological match). At the end of the film, after multiple failed
attempts, Colter manages to identify the bomber. Providing this
information to Col. Goodwin (a military officer played by Vera Farmiga)
and Prof. Rutlidge (the great Jeffrey Wright), the scientist who
designed the Source Code project, the terrorist is caught before he can
set off the second bomb, but after, of course, the first bomb on the
Chicago train explodes.

It is left somewhat vague as to whether Colter is going to parallel
realities, a la the Many World's interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, or
whether he is engaging in a quantum/ neurological simulation. If the
former (which seems to be borne out by the ending) then this would tie
into notions of time travel being explored in the context of quantum
gravity. That is, if one could time travel into the past, you need not
fear any Grandfather paradox (what if you killed your ancestor –
preventing your birth, but then you would not be able to travel back in
time to ice Grandpa). Some physicists argue that time travel is only
possible via parallel realities. You do not go back in time in your own
reality, but to an alternate Earth's past. You can thus kill as many
grandparents as you have bullets, remaining safe in your own timeline.
In any event it is assumed that the bomber is the same person every time
Colter enters the Source Code.

While everyone is celebrating the capture of the bomber, the first
successful trial of the Source Code project, Colter convinces Goodwin to
send him back one last time, to try to save the passengers on the train.
At the end of the eight minutes, he convinces Goodwin to terminate his
life support, allowing him to die in actuality, as the world and his
father believe happened months ago in Afghanistan. Needless to say, he
manages to stop the first bomb from exploding on the train, hands the
bomber to the authorities, and kisses his love interest just as the
eight minute mark is reached. We see Goodwin make good on her promise
and end his life support at that moment, at which point she is arrested
my the military police for acting against Rutlidge's instructions.

On the train however, Sean/Colter is still alive after the kiss. The
film implies that he goes on to live happily ever after in Sean's body,
with Colter's mind, while Colter's deformed body remains at the Nellis
laboratory on life support. As the bomb never went off on the Chicago
train – there was no reason to activate Coulter and send him into the
Source Code, and the project awaits its first true trial by fire. Thus
it is indicated that we are witnessing two alternate realities – one
where Goodwin is arrested after pulling the plug on Colter following the
successful application of the Source Code, and the other where
Sean/Colter is still alive, where the Source Code project has not been
activated.

Among the many discussions I've noted on the web about the ending of
this film, I wish to address two particular issues that are being
debated by the Hive Mind. In the film's final reality, where the bomb
does not explode on the train – does Colter's consciousness reside in
two places at once? And, what happens to Sean Fentriss' consciousness in
this final reality?

Reasonable people may reach different conclusions concerning these two
points. As I am a physics professor – I will tell you the RIGHT answers!

(1) In the final reality – Colter is NOT consciousness in two places at
once. He is awake and aware in Sean's body and at the same time his
damaged body is in the Nellis lab – IN A NON-CONSCIOUS STATE. He is not
awake and aware in the lab at Nellis, he can not initiate motion or form
an independent coherent thought. He is in essence brain dead, kept
artificially alive until there is a time and need for him to be
activated (if there is a terrorist attack).

Even if he is activated – this would NOT influence or affect Colter in
Sean's body, as it would take place in Sean/Colter's FUTURE. Remember he
was sent back to Chicago at 7:50 AM – the bomb exploded at 7:58. Time
progresses forward for both Sean/Colter and Nellis/Colter at the same
rate. This was why Goodwin and Rutlidge were upset about how many trials
it was taking – for each trial burned up a minimum of eight minutes, and
brought the second explosion closer to happening.

What you are doing and thinking now is not affected by what you will be
doing and thinking several hours from now. Do you know what you will be
thinking about several hours from now (ok – for the guys this is an easy
one). Nellis/Colter may not be activated for weeks/months/years later.
But even if he is – Sean/Coulter can live his life, unaffected by what
is happening in his future. There is no paradox, for Colter in Sean's
body is only awake and conscious at one point in time. Colter is NOT
like Schrodinger's cat, in two different conscious states
simultaneously, as they are separated in time.

(2) What happened to Sean's consciousness? Here there is a potential
problem. Basically I believe Sean is dead. When Colter's mind jumps into
his body, it over-writes Sean's consciousness. Rutlidge probably knows
this, and ignores the ethical issues. Sean will be dead when the bomb
explodes after all, and Rutlidge believes that cannot be changed. By
sending Colter into Sean's body, he robs Sean of the last eight minutes
of his life. As Sean is unaware that a bomb will explode, killing him
and everyone on board, he would not do anything extraordinary in those
eight minutes. Rutlidge probably believes that it is acceptable to
sacrifice the last eight minutes of one man's life in order to save
millions of lives if they can prevent the second bomb blast in downtown
Chicago. Every time Coulter enters the Source Code at 7:50 AM, he
essentially kills Sean. Sean will die in every reality where Colter does
not enter the code, and he will also die in all N – 1 realities where he
does – so this is an ethical problem of order 1/N where N goes to
infinity.

Alternatively, Sean may be alive in Colter's damaged body – but there
was no suggestion that something like that was happening. Here I'm
taking the Quantum Leap analogy too literally. (There is a wonderful tip
of the hat to Quantum Leap – listen carefully to Coulter's Dad).

Sorry this is so long. Never ask a professor a simple question – you
always get a lecture in reply!

.. _Sean: http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/cosmicvariance/author/scarroll/
.. _a YouTube video: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zmj1rpzDRZ0
.. |The Science of Superheroes| replace:: *The Science of Superheroes*
.. _The Science of Superheroes: http://www.amazon.com/Physics-Superheroes-Spectacular-Second/dp/1592405088/
.. |The Amazing Story of Quantum Mechanics| replace:: *The Amazing Story of Quantum Mechanics*
.. _The Amazing Story of Quantum Mechanics: http://www.amazon.com/Amazing-Story-Quantum-Mechanics-Exploration/dp/1592404790/
.. |Source Code| replace:: *Source Code*
.. _Source Code: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0945513/
.. _an interesting discussion taking place on the internets: http://www.ropeofsilicon.com/article/spoiler-talk-is-the-ending-of-source-code-open-to-interpretation
